 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS REPORT CONTAINS ASSESSMENTS OF COMMODITY AND TRADE ISSUES MADE BY USDA STAFF 
AND NOT NECESSARILY STATEMENTS OF OFFICIAL U.S. GOVERNMENT POLICY 
 
Voluntary Report – Voluntary - Public Distribution   Date:   June 10, 2022 
        Report Number: IN2022-0054 
 
Report Name: India's FSSAI Notifies Final Standards for Ayurveda Foods 
Country: India 
Post:  New Delhi 
Report Category:   FAIRS Subject Report 
 
 
Prepared By:  Radha Mani, Agricultural Assistant and Mariano J. Beillard, Senior Regional 
Agricultural Attaché 
Approved By: Mariano  Beillard, Senior Regional Agricultural Attaché 
 
Report Highlights: 
On May 9, 2022, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare/Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) published on its website Notification No. F. No. Stds/SP-05/A-1. Y(01) Food Safety and 
Standards (Ayurveda Aahara) Regulations (2022). The notification had previously been published in the 
Gazette of India (official gazette) on May 6, 2022. The implementation date for the regulations is May 5, 
2022 (date of upload). The regulations relate to Ayurveda Aahara (meaning food), and covers food 
prepared in accordance with the recipes or ingredients and/or processes as per methods described in the 
authoritative books of Ayurveda listed under ‘Schedule A’ of the regulations. 
  
 
   
   
 
Page 2 of 3 
 
DISCLAIMER: The information contained in this report was retrieved from the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India’s (FSSAI) website http://www.fssai.gov.in. The Foreign Agricultural 
Service (FAS) Office of Agricultural Affairs at the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi, USDA and/or the U.S. 
government make no claim of accuracy or authenticity. The Government of India has not officially 
endorsed this report. Import approval for any product is subject to local rules and regulations as 
interpreted by Indian officials at the time of product entry. [Note: Use Google Chrome to access the 
links that do not open in Internet Explorer. Indian host sites will geo-block site access on a rolling 
basis]. 
 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
 
On May 9, 2022, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare/Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) published on its website Notification No. F. No. Stds/SP-05/A-1. Y(01) Food Safety and 
Standards (Ayurveda Aahara) Regulations (2022). The notification had previously been published in the 
Gazette of India (official gazette) on May 6, 2022. The implementation date for the regulations is May 5, 
2022 (date of upload).  
 
Background:  
 
The regulations define Ayurveda Aahara to mean a food prepared in accordance with the recipes or 
ingredients and/or processes as per methods described in the authoritative books of Ayurveda listed 
under ‘Schedule A’ of the regulations including products which have other botanical ingredients in 
accordance with the concept of Ayurveda Aahara, but does not include: 
 
- Ayurvedic drugs or proprietary Ayurvedic medicines and medicinal products  
- Cosmetics  
- Narcotic or psychotropic substances  
- Herbs listed under Schedule E-1 of Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Drug and Cosmetics 
Rules, 1945  
- Metals based Ayurvedic drugs or medicines, bhasma (ash) or pishti (mineral formulation) and 
any other ingredients notified by the Authority (FSSAI) from time-to-time.1 
 
What Makes a Food an Ayurveda Aahara Food? 
 
Explanation 1: Food is defined under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) and 
regulations made thereunder. Recipes and ingredients specified in the ‘Schedule A’ authoritative 
books for promoting health or to meet specific physiological needs, including those foods specified 
for consumption during or post specified diseases, disorders referred as pathya in Ayurveda are 
covered under these regulations. 
                                                           
1 Pishti is a mineral formulation prepared from detoxified and purified drug substance by grinding in a mortar and pestle with 
a liquid medicine, such as rose water, and is called Pishti in ayurveda. Pishti is a fine powder of medicine that absorbs in 
human body easily and has similar efficacy like bhasma medicines. See, Ayur Times at: 
https://www.ayurtimes.com/pishti/#:~:text=Definition%20of%20Pishti,similar%20efficacy%20like%20Bhasma% 20medicin
es. 
 
 
   
   
 
Page 3 of 3 
 
Explanation 2: Adoption of processes for cooking or preparation of Ayurveda Aahara specified or 
described in the ‘Schedule A’ authoritative books for industrial scale manufacture and packing are 
permitted. Such adoptions shall be aimed to produce Ayurveda Aahara with quality and 
characteristics similar as specified in the books mentioned under ‘Schedule A’ of the 
regulations. 
 
Explanation 3: Any packed food item used in day-to-day life for dietary purpose such as pulses, 
rice, flour, vegetables including other foods specified under Food Safety and Standards Regulations 
shall not be covered under these regulations unless they otherwise meet the provisions of these 
regulations. Minimally processed food items involving cleaning, polishing, de-husking, and grading 
shall not fall under these regulations. 
 
Interested stakeholders should thoroughly read Schedule-E of the regulations. The FSSAI specifies the 
type of logo being required for Ayurveda Aahara labeling for the front-of-pack label.  
 
 
 
 
Notification:  
 
The FSSAI originally notified its draft regulation on this subject on June 30, 2021. It invited World 
Trade Organization (WTO) member countries to comment on the draft regulation. For additional 
information on the Ayurveda Aahara categories covered in the regulations, see GAIN-INDIA | IN2021-
0087 | – India’s FSSAI Notifies Draft Ayurveda Aahara Regulations. 
 
The full text (27 pages) of the FSSAI notification is accessible on the FSSAI’s website located at: 
https://fssai.gov.in/upload/notifications/2022/05/62789a20b54bdGazette_Notification_Ayurveda_Aahar
a_09_05_2022.pdf. 
 
 
Attachments: 
No Attachments. 
